---
title: Letter From the Editor
slug: letter-from-the-editor
date: 2024-12-18T21:10:00.000Z
draft: false
---
Welcome to the inaugural edition of *I Have That on Vinyl*.

![A portrait of the artist as a young woman](/images/upload/image1.png "A portrait of the artist as a young woman")

The greatest Christmas of my life happened in 1974. I was eleven years old and
the euphoria I felt upon receiving my very own turntable was something that
would be hard to replicate; all Christmases thereafter were ruined by the fact
that I peaked at eleven.

Along with the stereo, which was from Santa (come on, I was practically an
*adult*), was a wrapped present from my older cousin Stan. We didn’t normally
exchange gifts with cousins, but Stan - who at 19 was wise in the ways of music
and the world - thought it was necessary to celebrate the occasion of getting my
own turntable by purchasing my very first record.

I was a kid. I was into David Cassidy and Leif Garret. Stan thought I was
getting too old for all that and bought me a record called *The Now Explosion* -
a K-Tel compilation album of various artists singing AOR radio hits. Four Tops,
Gladys Knight, Bill Withers. It was all harmless music, nothing that would
really turn me away from my usual collection of teen heartthrobs. But it was
music, and it was *mine*. As soon as my dad hooked up my turntable and speakers,
I was in my room, huddled on my bed with my oversized headphones on, listening
to an album that was *my own*, not borrowed from my parents. Listening to an
album that was strictly mine, and not to be shared with my sisters on the living
room stereo changed me. *The Now Explosion* opened a door for me. I wanted more
records for myself. I wanted to have my own collection. Alas, I was 12 and still
dependent on others for my albums, so I satisfied myself by taking some of my
parents’ records into my room. I listened to the Beatles and I listened to
*Jesus Christ Superstar*, and I listened to Elvis. It’s what was available to me
and I learned to love them all.

I turned elsewhere for more music. My cousin Michael, who taught me how to
handle records (with reverence) and whose careful explanation of The Who’s
*Tommy* taught me that albums could tell a story. Al, who gave me my first
Grateful Dead Album (*Steal Your Face*). The record clerk at Modell’s, who
helped me pick out David Bowie’s *Young Americans* as my first album purchase.
Eddie, who always “borrowed” his brother’s Led Zeppelin albums so we could
listen to them in the fort behind his house. There were so many people involved
in my musical awakening. And once I did wake up to what was out there for me to
listen to, I never looked back.

I collected records through high school, though my collecting was limited by my
budget. I waited in line for the release of some records; *Van Halen II* and *In
Through the Out Door* at the record store in Broadway Mall come to mind. In 1983
I got a job at Record World at the busiest mall on Long Island. We got bonuses
every month and those bonuses came in the form of records. I was consistently
awarded the highest number of records you could get and so between that and my
cherry picking records when they came in, the amount of albums I owned soared.

Eventually - after my marriage, kids, divorce - I parted ways with a good
portion of my albums due to lack of both space and money. Selling off my
collection afforded me both things. I kept some sentimental records, but most of
them went the way of my marriage.

In 2019, my record collection consisted of those old sentimental albums, and
some I added from artists I loved whom I wanted to support. My then husband had
an old turntable from the early 90s and one day I asked him to hook it up. I
pulled out some records I still had - Aztec Camera, The Jam, The Clash - and
played them on some shitty speakers I dug out of the closet. It wasn’t ideal,
but it did reawaken a part of me that I thought I’d let go. My love of vinyl
wasn’t dead at all, it was only dormant and I just woke it up.

I went crazy during lockdown buying albums. I had an immediate need to stock up.
You know how it was during the pandemic. Some people made sourdough bread; I
started collecting vinyl.  I got a new turntable and speakers to better hear my
music. Opening each album as it arrived, I handled them with reverence, the way
I was taught. I vowed to never buy an album just to leave it shrink wrapped. I
would listen to everything I bought, even the variants.

Over the course of the time between then and now, I’ve amassed 400 records. Not
a lot in terms of big record collectors, but just the right size for me and my
living room. When I received a lovely cash gift from my bosses upon my
retirement, I upgraded my turntable and speakers, and also bought a Bose CD
player because I had started to collect those as well.

I’m happy with what I have now. I listen to records every day. Music and talking
about music and spreading music around are the things that drive me every day.

To get to tell the musical stories of so many people on this site is thrilling
to me. A week after I announced my idea for the I Have That On Vinyl, I had 177
submissions and/or pitches for the site. I let everyone know I could not pay at
this time and the submissions kept coming. I’m at 300 pitches, over 100 essays
already written, Q&As done, and dozens of interviews, some with your favorite
musicians. It has been an honor to listen to and read people’s vinyl journeys.
And now I get to share them with you.

I am fascinated with how people collect, what they collect, how they view their
collections. I want to know about the white wales and special albums. I want to
see the hidden gems. I want to hear about the hunt. And now I am doing all that.
Pretty neat.

I hope you enjoy I Have That On Vinyl as much as I enjoy bringing it to you.
