+++
title = "Nate Patrin on Traffic's \"The Low Spark of High Heeled Boys\""
slug = 'traffic-the-low-spark-of-high-heeled-boys'
draft = false
date = '2024-12-16T14:25:46-0500'

[params]
  featured = 'true'
  author = 'Nate Patrin'
+++

![img-1734377146768117000.jpg](/images/upload/img-1734377146768117000.jpg)
One of the things I miss the most about my early years of crate digging was the
thrilling feeling of displacement I felt every time I stumbled across an
unfamiliar old secondhand LP with an unconventional sleeve. I'm not just talking
about the artwork, but the very structure: the elaborate fold-out explosions of
Isaac Hayes' audaciously messianic *Black Moses* or Hawkwind's psych-modernist
Barney Bubbles concoction *X In Search of Space*; the die-cut oddities like the
octagonal Rolling Stones comp *Through the Past, Darkly (Big Hits Vol. 2)*or
Cheech & Chong's secobarbital-shaped *Sleeping Beauty*; and in its most
elaborate form, the futurist sci-fi puzzle box of Gil Mellé's beautifully
unnerving experimental synthesized score to *The Andromeda Strain*.

And yet it's one of the simpler examples that’s stuck with me the most – a
design now inseparable from my relationship to the music it houses. The sleeve
for Traffic's 1971 LP *The Low Spark of High Heeled Boys* is arresting in its
design. It's simple yet surreal, vivid yet enigmatic, a sort of pop-art trompe
l'oeil that attempts to bend the two-dimensional flatness of a record cover into
a curious 3D cubespace that flirts with MC Escher perspective tricks in a subtly
disorienting way. Maybe the best gag in this design is that the artist/title
script up top, rendered in a skinny echt-'70s mod font, is also outlined in a
three-dimensional space that runs perpendicular to the cubic illusion yet seems
to sit at an opposite angle to it, retreating into a background that appears
askew from the orientation of the rest of the composition.

The period-popular stylization of Airbrush Surrealism is in full effect here,
too; there's a vivid contrast between the hazy, naturalistic cloud wisps in the
background and the billowy, rounded, cartoonish formations on the left side that
seem to reflect them as caricature. The other prominent aspect of the album's
design is a quasi-architectural detail -- a marble wall adjoining a
black-and-white checkered-tiled floor -- that could evoke the lobby of an office
building or a department store or a bank or a castle. It's a contrast between
built space and the omnipresence of the atmosphere outside and up above,
cordoned inside a boundary that seems claustrophobic and spacious all at once.
Maybe that's a too-elaborate analysis of art meant to shroud a record featuring
such titles as "Rock and Roll Stew" and "Light Up or Leave Me Alone," but I
figure it's not too pretentious to venture into this kind of theorizing
considering the thing's in MoMA's collection.

And the funniest thing about this cover? The die cut on the upper-right corner
sabotages the industry tradition of snipping off that particular part of a
traditionally square 12" sleeve when a remaindered, low-selling album is bound
for the cutout bin. I bet discount retailers hated that.

This sleeve was the first major record cover design gig for Tony Wright, who
would become one of Island Records' premier in-house artists. *Low Spark* isn't
his sole MoMA entry; the flat-yet-vivid sleeve he designed for the B-52's '79
self-titled is in the collection, too. And every reggae fan either owns or is
negligent in not owning a host of legendary records Wright also designed and
illustrated the sleeves for: Bob Marley & the Wailers' *Natty Dread*, Max Romeo
& the Upsetters' *War in a Babylon*, Lee Perry's *Super Ape*, Junior Murvin's
*Police and Thieves*, and Third World's *96° In The Shade* rank among the most
notable. Throw in some choice odds and ends from other genres and scenes -- the
Meters' classic-singles comp *Cissy Strut*, MPB great Jorge Ben's joyous
samba-disco *Tropical*, John Martyn's artfully zooted dub fugue *One World*,
Suicide's synthrock panic attack *Suicide: Alan Vega - Martin Rev* -- and you've
got a combination of visual ingenuity and discographic excellence that stands up
next to contemporaries like Hipgnosis, Shusei Nagaoka, and even John Berg.

![img-1734377146869591000.jpg](/images/upload/img-1734377146869591000.jpg)
But the question remains: what does an album in a sleeve like this *sound* like,
and what kind of band would concoct it? Flip the LP over and the photo on the
back and you'll see an incarnation of Traffic that was drastically shaken up
from the one that made their name in the late '60s psychedelic scene. From the
original lineup, that's sax/flute player Chris Wood on the left in the
provocatively fitting pants, while the right side of the photo features drummer
Jim Capaldi and frontman/keyboardist Steve Winwood engaging in what looks like a
distracted conversation. Ghana-born percussionist Anthony "Rebop" Kwaku Baah is
the guy with the two-decade headstart on Goodie Mob camo chic. And the
cheerful-looking fellas behind him and Wood are bassist Ric Grech, who'd
followed Winwood from the burned-out husk of stalled-out supergroup Blind Faith,
and session drummer Jim Gordon, who was in the midst of appearing on about 50
different rock records worth owning between the mid-'60s and late-'70s before
committing one of music's most troubling "separate the artist from the art"
tragedies.

Itinerant guitarist Dave Mason had been a sporadic enough member of the group
that they could technically be considered a trio-plus-one for their '60s
come-up, but they sprawled out a bit after a decade-straddling cycle of
disbanding and reforming. Winwood conceived of 1970's *John Barleycorn Must Die*
as a solo record that became a Traffic reunion once he realized Wood and
Capaldi still made good collaborators. Then he brought on Grech, and recruited
Gordon and Rebop to make up for Capaldi's reduced role in the band as he dealt
with the sudden death of his infant son to SIDS. This lineup cut a live album,
1971's *Welcome to the Canteen*, that's most notable for turning two of
Winwood's early radio hits -- "Dear Mr. Fantasy" and Spencer Davis Group's
"Gimme Some Lovin'" -- into roiling jam sessions conversant with
post-psychedelia's increasing enthusiasm for soul-jazz and Latin rock.

{{< youtube id="E2ubpNmSTAU" loading="lazy" >}}

And it's that mode that makes *Low Spark* so fascinating to me. Granted, I enjoy
all that "why punk had to happen" music from the early '70s -- self-indulgent
soloing and jazzbo experimentation and shameless attempts by rock'n'rollers to
incorporate funk and R&B. ("Can't You Hear Me Knocking" is still one of my five
favorite Stones songs, for God's sake.) But I heard this album for the first
time as a teenager in the mid-'90s, when I was spending half my time listening
to contemporary alt-rock, hip-hop, and dance music, and the other half indulging
my record-geek classic rock fascinations, so my tastes were already getting kind
of tangled and contradictory. I picked up my first copy of this album at the
same St. Paul Cheapo Records location where Hüsker Dü’s Grant Hart had worked
decades prior, and listened to it on a hand-me-down Zenith Allegro
radio/turntable console while wearing a pair of massive, beige,'70s-era
headphones for that period-accurate experience (at least in auditorily; I was
not connected to a good source for schwag weed or reds).

So I'd spend some curious mind-wandering late nights sinking into an album that
came out six years before I was born and finding things in it that I wasn't
hearing in too many other places. In retrospect it's the kind of thing that made
my eventual enthusiasm for Steely Dan seem like a foregone conclusion: Traffic's
jazz-rock plays here like a more idealistic (if often frustrated) shaggy British
progenitor to Walt and Don's more sardonic and meticulous engagement with the
form. Wood's flute playing lends a mellow pastoral cast to the folky groove of
"Hidden Treasure," the hippie-Stevie yearning of "Many A Mile to Freedom," and
the shapeshifting country/blues/psych/fusion of "Rainmaker," and while I don't
click with those songs like I do with the rest of the album, I do like them
enough to acknowledge that the effect is a lot closer to Yusef Lateef than
Jethro Tull and thank goodness for that. There are also the two radio-ready cuts
sung by Capaldi, which sound kind of like War fronted by someone working through
a lot of personal exasperation. The Gordon/Grech-penned "Rock & Roll Stew" is
one of those songs about how the touring life means having to figure out how to
deal with being bored out of your mind on the road, while Capaldi's own "Light
Up or Leave Me Alone" is louche gripe about some social-setting energy vampire
fully intent on wasting his time. (Its target is apparently a woman of vague
provenance -- "the skirt that you're wearing is way past your knees" is the sole
detail shared.) Pretty solid stuff, a couple of strong jams and nothing that'd
make me reposition the needle.

{{< youtube id="vDGorIWYz-A" loading="lazy" >}}

Yet nothing hit me quite like the title cut did. In immersing myself in this odd
corner of a vividly rendered yet long-dated aesthetic of an older and
increasingly unfashionable generational touchstone, I gravitated toward the
longest cut on the record, and got deeply and thoroughly lost inside it. Its
title is an enigma, a phrase conjured up by actor Michael J. Pollard (C.W. Moss
in *Bonnie and Clyde*), and alternately interpreted as referring either to
proto-glam countercultural gender-nonconformists or organized-crime hitmen (or,
according to some dart-throwing speculator on Genius, some sort of narcotic
reference). But the song's execution is driven by a strange duality. It's almost
the musical equivalent of the illusion on the cover: it fades in to a
meditatively paced piano-driven riff that could be called a dirge if it wasn't
so light-footed, while Rebop's conga, Gordon's fills, and the first of Wood's
hazily awed sax solos pulling you along into a velvety, alluring sense of
disoriented ennui. And yet when it gets to the hook, it's damn near as simple as
rock and roll gets -- all hammered piano chords that you can trace back to Fats
Domino and terse emphatic two-note sax exclamations snapping you out of your
fugue until that wandering quietude returns to reclaim the atmosphere. The
keyboard solos themselves are a study in contrasts, too -- the piano is graceful
and poised, but there's also this sharp, piercing whine-buzz of a counterpoint
via a Hammond B3 run through a fuzzbox that sounds like a huge and unwieldy yet
luminescent insect. There's this oddly intense yet calming push-pull between
energetic nerviness and placid contemplation that gives a nearly 12-minute song
the feeling of something much more dynamic and startling than your typical
half-a-side-filling jam-sesh workout.

As for the lyrics, those words did plenty to wash away my earlier association
between Steve Winwood's voice and the beer commercial mersh I endured as a kid.
While it's probably noteworthy to point to "The Low Spark of High Heeled Boys"
as an early contrast to a bummer sellout arc that would later betray its own
message, the lyrics provide this other aspect to the song's duality -- a balance
between cynicism and hope -- that informs its odd blend of abstraction and
to-the-point simplicity. *And you just can't escape from the sound* is the
threat, *don't worry too much, it'll happen to you* the serene acceptance. The
chorus sets a "you" (or the singer himself) up for a fall -- yet another victim
of a capital-over-art business model that screws over musicians while "the man
in the suit has just bought a new car / From the profit he's made on your
dreams" -- only for some mysterious counterforce sweeping in to take that threat
out. It might disturb you, might make you reevaluate your path and what your
next move might be, but in the end you've got to ask yourself whether you'll
remember how that conflict plays out and whether you'll ever wind up
participating in it yourself. "If I gave you everything that I owned/And asked
for nothing in return/Would you do the same for me as I would for you?" is as
simple a moral a question there is, and yet Winwood sings it like it's still a
revelation. Maybe, for an audience that had likely been pulled through a
gauntlet of disillusionment during the previous several years, it still had to
be.

Sadly, it feels like the returns diminished, at least when I set out trying to
find out where they went from here. Traffic cast off Grech and Gordon, had a
stint where a few alumni of the Swampers bolstered their ranks, and released a
few albums that reiterated the *Low Spark* sound to increasingly ambivalent
effect. (*Shoot Out at the Fantasy Factory* even kept the same die cut cube
concept for their Wright-illustrated cover, but that just made it look like a
water-treading sequel.) Winwood battled the life-threatening abdominal condition
peritonitis, Wood fought with substance abuse and depression, and the group
broke up after a frustrated, ulcer-wracked Winwood walked off mid-concert during
an October '74 show in Chicago. For the most part, even though *Low Spark* was a
pretty decent-sized hit in the States, they seem to have failed to make the
influential cross-generational music-head leap that peers like Steely Dan,
Fleetwood Mac, and Joni Mitchell earned. Still, you can still hear their traces
if you search carefully enough. Sometimes you just have to let your perspective
play tricks on you.

{{< youtube id="e00uA4gUABU" loading="lazy" >}}

---

Nate Patrin is a native of St. Paul, Minnesota, who has been writing about music
and its role in culture for over two decades. His work has previously appeared in sites and publications including
Pitchfork, Stereogum, Bandcamp Daily, City Pages, Maggot Brain, The Shfl, and many more. His first book, *Bring
That Beat Back: How Sampling Built Hip-Hop*, was published by University of Minnesota Press in 2020. His second,
*The Needle and the Lens: Pop Goes to the Movies from Rock 'n' Roll to Synthwave*, was also published by
University of Minnesota Press in 2023, and has been nominated for a 2024
Minnesota Book Award. He can be found on Bluesky at [@natepatrin.bsky.social](https://bsky.app/profile/natepatrin.bsky.social)
